All right. Now the
the the
first the first verse of the 37 practice
of bodhicatt is
heaven. Now attain the freedoms and
advantages a great bow so difficult to
find in order to free yourself and
others from the ocean of samsara.
Listening, reflecting and meditating
with diligence day and night is the
practice of bodhicattvas.
Uh so as is it before I said this text
contains 37 verses right uh but the the
first two verses are not uh not counted
uh among the 37. So the first of the 37
practice uh starts right here and this
this has um two parts. one uh the first
part is the preliminary they call
preliminary practice uh which is the
practitioner engage in in the practice
of the the dharma. Then the second part
is an explanation of the parts of the
three uh levels of practitioners.
Um so the first part has um seven
different preliminary practices. Okay.
So um the first is recognition of
precious human life. Um so much to
explains here how to uh engage in this
bodhic satta practices so that um they
will be able to free themselves and
others from um suffering of samsara. So
the first line of this verse is about
the precious opportunity of being born
as a human right as a human.
So there are three uh way of understand
precious human life. Um the first
um identifying its freedoms and
advantages, the fortunate.
The second understanding the value of
such a life
and then the third seeing how difficult
it is to find. Okay, those three
um through contemplating these three
we will know how precious it is.
Uh in Buddhism we always talk about how
precious human life is right.
Um
so why is being born as a human life
considered precious? Why
um all sentient beings
um hold their lives as precious. All
sentient beings, not only humans,
but in the teachings
only if we engage ourselves in the
dharma, dharma practice and if if put
effort into into the dharma only then do
our lives become a precious.
uh that's because
um it provides a unique opportunity
uh for growth and liberation
enlightenment.
So heaven a a a human life is a
necessary condition for practicing the
dharma.
Um as a human being we possess this uh
precious opportunity to practice the
dharma and reduce or eliminate suffering
u and the cause of suffering.
So this is what makes human life
precious.
Therefore we need to be careful to not
waste it. So much to said the human life
is like like a boat and samsara is like
an ocean that has to be cross it. Uh if
we don't have the boat right it would be
quite uh hopeless uh but we have a good
one
good one. So the only thing we need to
do is get inside the boat and and get
going.
It takes time, right? Sometimes we're
tired. Oh, this is too long.
It takes time to get the other side.
It's just long journey, the side of the
ocean, right? So we need to keep going
day and night without wasting a moment
of uh of our life.
Uh that's that. Now the second line of
this verse is about the um the uh two
benefits that we can achieve through
this precious human life.
First we can help ourselves eliminate
our own suffering from samsara.
Second we can also um use our precious
human life to help others eliminate
their suffering from samsara.
So the bodhic sattva's goal is not just
a personal
um enlightenment liberation but also the
liberation of others. Um that's second.
Then the third line of this verse is
it's it's necessary to practice dharma
day and night without distractions.
So we need to have some
intellectual knowledge as well as
experiential knowledge.
Intellectual knowledge comes first,
right? Before um um before gaining
experiential knowledge um this
intellectual knowledge, this step is
necessary. Right?
However, thinking about the teachings
alone, just thinking about teaching
alone doesn't bring realizations,
experience.
So, we must put them into practice our
daily life. So, we need to rely upon
these three uh aspects of practice,
listening, reflecting and meditating.
Understand? Um so this verse describes
the fundamental aspect of the bodhic
sattva's practice and using the
opportunity of precious human life to
engage in dharma activities for the
benefit of ourselves and others.
So whatever we want to do
it is right now in our hands right now.
Uh making this life meaningful moment by
moment by recognizing this precious
human life.
This is the reason why uh the practice
of precious human life uh is given first
all the time in Tibet and the teachings
like mind training teachings the bodhic
satta remember bodhicara avatara all
they talk first they talk about precious
human life it's necessary practiced in
dharma
so now we're done this verse right here
it's a good time to take the vows. Um,
right? We have a precious human life.
So, I'm going to give you the refuge and
bodhicattva vows. Uh, since you have a
precious human life, uh, and those
people who already have taken the vows,
um, it's important to renew the vows. Um
and um those of you who did not take
them yet, uh this is the time to uh take
the vows. But if you think uh this is
very important, you are not ready to
take in them. You don't have to. Okay?
Just sit there and you can you can
you can you can learning about the vows.
What is vows? you know um and uh um
just to sit there and you don't have to
but if you feel you're ready this is a
perfect time since you have a precious
human life in order to take refuge body
self vows you need precious human life
and taking these vows you know helps
protect you from harming others
and improves faith in Bodhi bodhic
chitta that's the reason okay when you
take refuge vows you will develop your
faith when you take bodhic sattva vows
you will learn you will develop bodhic
jetta mind
uh so that you know uh because of your
faith in bodhic jetta uh uh they help
and protect you from harming others
harming yourself that's the reason
that's the the essence Why you need to
take this vows? Okay. Atisha says if you
want to make progress towards the
enlightenment that you are wishing to
achieve then you have to take this vows.
Uh so
um there are um three things you need to
do. First you must take refuge in three
jewels.
uh it is the foundation of all other
vows uh and uh foundation of your
practice
and Buddhism and second you must belong
to Mahayana Buddhism
and have the aspiration to do the
practice of bodhic sattva. Okay. Uh
third you must keep the important
precept of this vows.
Understand three things.
Um and the refuge vow is about maintain
a pure connection to the three jewels.
Okay. And um essence of practice Buddha
Dharma um is develop your faith uh your
trust and the three jewels that's the
bodhic ja and the bodhic satta vow is a
commitment to take the mahayana path uh
the bodhic sattva's journey uh it's it's
a commitment based on the realization of
the suffering of all sentient beings And
it's a commitment to lead sentient
beings to liberation from the suffering
of samsara.
Um so uh that's the bodhic sattva vow.
And today we're going to uh as usual to
use this vows ritual according to the
tradition of uh uh the patuchi. Uh and
this ritual has three uh three parts. Uh
the preparation part, the main part and
then the conclusion part. The
preparation part is when you take these
vows um you should have a pure
motivation again of of doing it uh for
the benefit of others. That's important.
That's the preparation. Motivation,
right? Pure motivation. I'm going to
take bodhis and refuge vows um uh
develop my capacity in order to help
others. Uh
now
those of you want to take uh these vows
uh here we're going to recite the refuge
and bodhichata prayer three times. Um,
do we have the Yep, we have
um
refuge and bodies of
racial and refuge bodies of page 42.
Are you ready?
Great.
In the Buddha sabana in the spring
assembly I take the refuge into lantern
and his chief. May the merit of my
generosity and other virtues acts lead
to the Buddha for the benefit of all
beings in the Buddha dharma and hsey I
take refuge until enlightenment achieved
may
be the inseuge
the merit of my generosity
of all beings. Okay, that is the
preparation part for the vows. Now that
we have the main section which is
talking um taking the the refuge and
bodhic vows. Here you need to remember
three things.
Your motivation again uh your
visualization and your commitment. three
things. So your motivation is this
right? I'm taking this vows for the
benefit of all sentient beings including
myself. How simple is that right? And
then your visualization is you're
requesting the Buddha's bodhicatta's
intention for the vows. That means
you're going to visualize the Buddha,
the bodhic sattvas uh in front of you
and take them as as a witness um
visualization. Now I'm going to recite
the vow Rachel three times. The first
you're going to take here refuge vows.
Okay? I'm going to recite the the the
vow ratio three times. And during the
third restitation, it's important to
make your commitment. That's what you
need to do. It means like you should be
thinking that from today until
enlightenment is achieved, I am a
Buddhist practitioner.
So I will keep the Buddha as my teacher,
the Dharma is my path, the Sana is my
spiritual friend. Uh, with that, okay,
I'm going to recite the refuge vow
ritual three times. You need to repeat
after me um uh three times. Okay. So
here if you are ready uh your
motivation, your visualization, your
commitment, then you have the vows.
Okay. Uh I I will recite you repeat
after me. Okay. You Buddha and Bodhi sas
of the 10 directions and you my teacher
think about me.
Yes.
I named you say your name here. Take
from this time until death.
The most supreme of all human beings.
The Buddha is my refuge.
The most supreme of all that is free
from desire and dharma. I take refuge.
The most supreme of all assemblies in
the sana. I take refuge.
From this point until death. I ask the
teacher to accept me as a lay follower
who has faith in the trooper refuge.
Okay. Now the second you Buddha and
bodhic sattas the 10 directions and you
my teacher think about me.
I take from this time until death
the most supreme of all human beings,
the Buddha as my refuge.
The most supreme of all that is free
from desire and the dharma take refuge.
The most supreme of all assemblies in SA
I take refuge
from this point until death. I asked the
teacher to accept me as a lay follower
who has faith in refuge.
Okay. Now the last you Buddha and bodhic
sattvas of the 10 directions and you my
teacher think about me.
I take from this time until death
the most supreme of all human beings.
The Buddha is my refuge.
The most supreme of all that is free
from desire in the dharma I take refuge.
The most supreme of all assemblies in
the sana I take refuge
from this point until death. Ask the
teacher to accept me as a lay follower
who has faith in the refuge.
Okay. Now you received the refuge vow
and um the lineage sort of blessings for
your refuge vow. Um and um I will um
give you a refugee name and a
certificate if you want one. um not
necessary but just let me know. Um now
the next is the bodhicatta vow. There
are um many ways to take these vows but
today uh again we're going to use the
ceremony for taking the bodhicatta vow
and the tradition of the uh profound
view of nangar juna. uh it means you're
going to take the vows of bodhic chhatta
uh in aspiration and uh action together
right sometimes teachers give you the uh
only like aspiration bodhi jetta vow and
action bodhi jetta vow separately but
we're going to take together today
that's the profound of the tradition of
the profound of nagar jana um uh uh
tradition so take them together. So um
now here again you need to request the
Buddha's bodhic sattas attention for
your bodhic sattva vows uh the same as
before and uh it's important you make
sure that your motivation is correct for
the vow. Uh with that here we need to
recite request and prayer this prayer
three times. Okay,
ready. All you Buddhas and Buddhas in
the temple, all you great bodhic sattas
on the 10 levels, all you great gurus by
the vote, turn your mind towards the
near. All you Buddhas in this direction.
All you great body sas on the 10 levels.
All you great
turn your mind towards me. Pray. All you
Buddhas glory and the 10 directions. All
you great bodhic sattas and the 10
levels. All you great gurus
turn your mind toward me. Okay. So when
you take the bodhicatta vow it means you
follow the same path followed by the
past uh bodhicattvas
and take the bodhicatta path for the
benefit of others
uh including yourself. Uh with that
motivation and with that commitment
we're going to begin the ceremony. Uh
and here you need to repeat the vow
Rachel three times after me again. And
during the third restitation
uh at the end of the uh the vow Rachel
uh you have received the vow. Uh so now
please um repeat the bodhic satta vow
Rachel after me three times here.
Just as all the Buddhas of the past
rose bodhichata and established
themselves by stages
the training of bodhic sappa just so for
the benefit of beings I will arose
bodhicetta and likewise I will turn
progressively and those practice
The second just as all the Buddhas of
the past arose bodhicitta
and established themselves by stages in
the train of bodhic sattva.
Just so for the benefit of beings, I
will arose both and likewise I will
train progressively on in those
practice.
Just as all the Buddhas of the past
arose bodhicitt,
they established themselves by stages in
the training of bodhic sattvas.
Just so for the benefit of beings, I
will arose bodhicha
and likewise I will train progressively
on those practices.
All right. Now you have the bodhic
sattva vow that comes from the lunage of
uh nangjuna
which means uh you received both
aspiration
uh and action bodhicitta the bodhic
sattva vows. So um it's important to
keep the commitment you made during this
uh ceremony today to keep your
commitment.
Um
if the mind has the um refuge and bodhic
sattva vows then the body and speech
will also um spontaneously adopt
positive conduct, positive actions.
Okay. So that's why you have to keep the
commitment you made during this rich the
ceremony today. Now we're done with the
uh preparation and the main section of
the ratio of the refuge and bodhicatta
vows. Uh now the next part is the
conclusion which is the cultivation of
joy for oneself and joy for others. It
means from now on you have became a
mahaana
Buddhist practitioner.
Okay. uh became you
uh took both refuge and bodhic sattva
vows, right? So you are able to do this
because of your precious human life,
your uh intelligent, your your um
discipline, your commitment. Um so it's
it's wonderful. It's wonderful. This is
the best and ever something happen in
your life. Right? So once you take these
vows and keep them as your uh precious
um dharma tasure uh you purify a lot of
uh uh negative karma and at the same
time you accumulate a lot of merit
uh which is the best condition for
generating faith and bodhicitta. uh in
your mind. Therefore, now you're going
to recite um cultivation of joy uh for
yourself and joy for others.
Today my life has become meaningful
having well attained this human
existence. I have been bringing and
Buddha now
I do from now on my actions benefit
never shall I go
just like blame person discovering
joy and hypoc
today and presents our protectors. I
invite all beings in the state of the
land in the feast
of death and others.
All right.
Cultivate joy for others. That's that.
Now the last thing you need to do is u
the mandala offering. Traditionally in
Tibetan, you know, when you take refuge
bodhisata vows, you
uh offering mandela um for sort of
receiving this vows. The mandala
offering represents everything, right?
And it is a sort of a symbolic and a
devotional
act in Bu uh uh Buddhist practice. So
here you uh thankfully
offer the mandela to the Buddhas and
bodhic sapphas as a gesture of
gratitude. Uh and it represents your
intention to sort of repay their
kindness. So please recite the mandala
prayer together uh one time.
our homeless
body.
I offer all of this as a beautiful
mandala to be jewels. All right.
Mandala.
Okay. Now we have um also the um the
bodhicetta aspiration prayer. May
supreme precious bodhicetta take birth
where it has not reason where it has
reason when but continue to grow forever
more.
All right. Now we are done with the uh
refuge and bodhis vow. uh but um one
more thing I would like to uh let you
know is that uh it's important to the uh
renew both vows every day after you rece
you you have received uh these vows
um and you should um um recite the the
renewal of the refuge and bodies of vow
prayer it's called um a daily practice
to renew the bodhic safa. Uh it's it's
on the website if you need it this um
text. So every morning you should do
three prostitutations if you can. Uh and
then you recite the renewal of the
refuge and bodhis vow prayer in front of
uh uh always remember this motivation
visualization and commitment. Um so uh
you uh
uh renew the bodhic your refuge vows in
front of the Buddhas and bodhic sappas
and just think of all the lineage and uh
you should remember the commitments you
made today and keep your vows purely um
as much as you can. Um the refuge vow
uh establish a foundation of faith uh
trust and um um expresses your intention
to follow Buddhist path and bodhicatta
vow expresses your intention to follow
the Mahayana path. Not just the Buddhist
Buddhist path but especially the
Mahayana Buddhist path and is a deeper
commitment and altruistic goal of
helping others and achieving liberation.
Uh so the purpose of taking the refuge
vow and bodhic sappa vow is wanting to
develop faith and bodhicitta mind. That
is the whole point. Okay. So now we need
to recite the second chapter of the body
uh uh bodhicara.
So second chapter you probably know but
it's about perforation.
Uh so you have to purify all the
negative karmmas we have done so that uh
you can develop your faith and develop
bodhicitta. So that's the reason uh so
just uh focus on the if you can't um uh
think of all the the meaning of the
verses when you recite you don't don't
worry but just focus your you know just
be mindful and just follow the words and
then you recite this is part of our
meditation okay so uh restitation not to
recite The
second chapter, please.